DOCS-5309 Mapping Prometheus Metrics to Datadog Metrics Doc Update (#18097)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/integrations/guide/prometheus-metrics.md

`collect_counters_with_distributions` can be used to send `_count` and `_sum` values as `count`s alongside the distribution.

### Summary

For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `summary`][107], `_count` and `_sum` values are mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively. Quantile samples are mapped to a metric of type `gauge` with the `.quantile` suffix.

[101]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#gauge
[102]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter
[103]: /metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic_count
[104]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram
[105]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/whats-next-monitoring-kubernetes/#distribution-metrics
[107]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter
[108]: /metrics/distributions/
[109]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/computing-accurate-percentiles-with-ddsketch/

{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "Before OpenMetrics v2.0.0" %}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{% tab "Legacy Vesion" %}}
```

  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about the OpenMetrics integration"
- link: "/agent/kubernetes/prometheus/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Kubernetes Prometheus and OpenMetrics metrics collection"
---

## Overview

This page walks you through how Prometheus or OpenMetrics check metrics map to existing Datadog metric types.

## Prometheus and OpenMetrics metric types

* `counter`: A cumulative metric that represents a single monotonically increasing counter, whose value can only increase—or be reset to zero.
* `gauge`: A metric that represents a single numeric value, which can arbitrarily go up and down.
* `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.
* `summary`: Similar to `histogram`; samples observations, provides a sum of all observed values, and calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.

## How Prometheus/OpenMetrics metrics map to Datadog metrics

For more information, see [OpenMetrics Metric Types][2] and [Datadog Metric Types][3].

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Latest Version" %}}
### Gauge

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `gauge`][101] maps to Datadog's `gauge`.

### Counter

> [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][102] is mapped to Datadog's `count`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][102] maps to Datadog's `count`.
```

### Histogram

> For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `histogram`][104], the `_count`, `_sum`, and `_bucket` values of the histogram are each mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count`, `.sum`, and `.bucket` suffix in their name, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `histogram`][104], the `_count`, `_sum`, and `_bucket` values of the histogram are each mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count`, `.sum`, and `.bucket` suffix in their names, respectively.
```

If the `histogram_buckets_as_distributions` parameter is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][109] and allow for more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the Datadog Engineering Blog [post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][105].

`collect_counters_with_distributions` can be used to send `_count` and `_sum` values as `count`s alongside the distribution.

> ### GaugeHistogram
> 
> TBD.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> TBD.

Reviewer: Did you mean to fill this in, or are you still waiting for information?

Author: Still waiting on info from @alopezz on this one!

Reviewer 2: I don't think this applies, so we should just remove the section I believe.

### Summary

For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `summary`][107], `_count` and `_sum` values are mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively. Quantile samples are mapped to a metric of type `gauge` with the `.quantile` suffix.

[101]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#gauge
[102]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter
[103]: /metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic_count
[104]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram
[105]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/whats-next-monitoring-kubernetes/#distribution-metrics
[107]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter
[108]: /metrics/distributions/
[109]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/computing-accurate-percentiles-with-ddsketch/

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Before OpenMetrics v2.0.0" %}}
### Counter

> By default, [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][101] is mapped to Datadog's `count`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][101] maps to Datadog's `count`.
```

However, if the parameter `send_monotonic_counter` is `false`, then this metric is sent as `gauge`.

### Gauge

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `gauge`][103] maps to Datadog's `gauge`.

### Histogram

For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `histogram`][104], the `_count` and `_sum` values of the histogram are each mapped to Datadog's `gauge` type and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively.

If the `send_histogram_buckets` parameter is `true`, `_bucket` samples are sent to Datadog with a `.bucket` suffix, and are also mapped to Datadog's `gauge` by default.

Setting the `send_distribution_counts_as_monotonic` parameter to `true` causes the `_count` and `_bucket` metrics to be sent as type `count` instead. Setting `send_distribution_sums_as_monotonic` does the same for `_sum` metrics.

> If the `send_distribution_buckets` parameter is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][107] and allow for more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the Datadog Engineering Blog [post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][106].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `send_distribution_buckets` parameter is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][107], and allow for more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the Datadog Engineering Blog [post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][106].
```

### Summary

> For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `summary`][105], `_count` and `_sum` values are mapped to Datadog's `gauge` type by default, and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively. Quantile samples are mapped to a metric of type `gauge` with the `.quantile` suffix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `summary`][105], `_count` and `_sum` values are mapped to Datadog's `gauge` type by default, and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their names, respectively. Quantile samples are mapped to a metric of type `gauge` with the `.quantile` suffix.
```

aliases:
  - /integrations/faq/how-to-collect-metrics-with-sql-stored-procedure/
further_reading:
- link: "/integrations/openmetrics/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about the OpenMetrics integration"
- link: "/agent/kubernetes/prometheus/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Kubernetes Prometheus and OpenMetrics metrics collection"
---

## Overview

This page walks you through how Prometheus or OpenMetrics check metrics map to existing Datadog metric types.

## Prometheus and OpenMetrics metric types

> {{< tabs >}}
> {{% tab "Latest Version" %}}
> * `gauge`: A metric that represents a single numeric value, which can arbitrarily go up and down.
> * `counter`: A cumulative metric that represents a single monotonically increasing counter, whose value can only increase—or be reset to zero.
> * `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.
> * `summary`: Similar to `histogram`; samples observations, provides a sum of all observed values, and calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.
> 
> {{% /tab %}}
> {{% tab "Legacy" %}}
> 
> * `counter`: A cumulative metric that represents a single monotonically increasing counter, whose value can only increase—or be reset to zero.
> * `gauge`: A metric that represents a single numeric value, which can arbitrarily go up and down.
> * `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.
> * `summary`: Similar to `histogram`; samples observations, provides a sum of all observed values, and calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.
> {{% /tab %}}
> {{< /tabs >}}

Author: ```suggestion
* `counter`: A cumulative metric that represents a single monotonically increasing counter, whose value can only increase—or be reset to zero.
* `gauge`: A metric that represents a single numeric value, which can arbitrarily go up and down.
* `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.
* `summary`: Similar to `histogram`; samples observations, provides a sum of all observed values, and calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.
```

## How Prometheus/OpenMetrics metrics map to Datadog metrics

For more information, see [OpenMetrics Metric Types][2] and [Datadog Metric Types][3].

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Latest Version" %}}
### Gauge

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `gauge`][101] maps to Datadog's `gauge`.

### Counter

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][102] is mapped to Datadog's `count`.

> ### StateSet
> 
> TBD.
> 
> ### Info
> TBD.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/sql-server-metrics/#create-a-stored-procedure-to-generate-and-collect-metrics"
  tag: "Blog"
  text: "Create a stored procedure to generate and collect metrics"
- link: "/integrations/openmetrics/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about the OpenMetrics integration"
- link: "/integrations/mysql/"
  tag: "Documentation"

>   text: "Learn about the MySQL integration"

Reviewer 2: Can we remove all references to MySQL, SQL Server and SQL stored procedures? Those integrations don't use Prometheus / OpenMetrics nor seem related in any way. Same for the alias (I really wonder how that came to be 🤔 )

- link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/sql-server-metrics/#create-a-stored-procedure-to-generate-and-collect-metrics"
  tag: "Blog"
  text: "Create a stored procedure to generate and collect metrics"
- link: "/integrations/openmetrics/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about the OpenMetrics integration"
- link: "/integrations/mysql/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about the MySQL integration"
- link: "/agent/kubernetes/prometheus/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Kubernetes Prometheus and OpenMetrics metrics collection"
---

## Overview

This page walks you through how Prometheus or OpenMetrics check metrics map to existing Datadog metric types.

## Prometheus and OpenMetrics metric types

> For more information, see [Kubernetes Prometheus and OpenMetrics Metrics Collection][1].

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this link fits with the topic, at least not as the first sentence in a section about the types, since the target of the link doesn't seem to even mention metric types at all.

Author: ```suggestion
```

* `summary`: Similar to `histogram`; samples observations, provides a sum of all observed values, and calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Before OpenMetrics v2.0.0" %}}

* `counter`: A cumulative metric that represents a single monotonically increasing counter, whose value can only increase—or be reset to zero.
* `gauge`: A metric that represents a single numeric value, which can arbitrarily go up and down.
* `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.
* `summary`: Similar to `histogram`; samples observations, provides a sum of all observed values, and calculates configurable quantiles over a sliding time window.
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## How Prometheus/OpenMetrics metrics map to Datadog metrics

For more information, see [OpenMetrics Metric Types][2] and [Datadog Metric Types][3].

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Latest Version" %}}
### Gauge

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `gauge`][101] maps to Datadog's `gauge`.

### Counter

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][102] is mapped to Datadog's `count`.

### StateSet

TBD.

### Info
TBD.

### Histogram

> For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `histogram`][104], the `_count`, `_sum` and `_bucket` values of the histogram are each mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count`, `.sum` and `.bucket` suffix in their name, respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `histogram`][104], the `_count`, `_sum`, and `_bucket` values of the histogram are each mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count`, `.sum`, and `.bucket` suffix in their name, respectively.
```

> If the parameter `send_distribution_buckets` is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][109] and allow more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the relevant Datadog [blog post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][105].

Author: ```suggestion
If the `send_distribution_buckets` parameter is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][109] and allow for more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the Datadog Engineering Blog [post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][105].
```

`collect_counters_with_distributions` can be used to send `_count` and `_sum` values as `count`s alongside the distribution.

### GaugeHistogram

TBD.

### Summary

For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `summary`][107], `_count` and `_sum` values are mapped to Datadog's `count` type and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively. Quantile samples are mapped to a metric of type `gauge` with the `.quantile` suffix.

[101]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#gauge
[102]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter

> [103]: /metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic-count

Author: ```suggestion
[103]: /metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic_count
```

[104]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram
[105]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/whats-next-monitoring-kubernetes/#distribution-metrics
[107]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter
[108]: /metrics/distributions/
[109]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/computing-accurate-percentiles-with-ddsketch/

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Before OpenMetrics v2.0.0" %}}
### Counter

By default, [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `counter`][101] is mapped to Datadog's `count`.

However, if the parameter `send_monotonic_counter` is `false`, then this metric is sent as `gauge`.

### Gauge

[Prometheus/OpenMetrics `gauge`][103] maps to Datadog's `gauge`.

### Histogram

For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `histogram`][104], the `_count` and `_sum` values of the histogram are each mapped to Datadog's `gauge` type and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively.

> If the parameter `send_histogram_buckets` is `true`, `_bucket` samples will also be sent to Datadog with a `.bucket` suffix, being also mapped to Datadog's `gauge` by default.

Author: ```suggestion
If the `send_histogram_buckets` parameter is `true`, `_bucket` samples are sent to Datadog with a `.bucket` suffix, and are also mapped to Datadog's `gauge` by default.
```

> Setting the parameter `send_distribution_counts_as_monotonic` to `true` will cause `_count` and `_bucket` metrics to be sent as type `count` instead. `send_distribution_sums_as_monotonic` will do the same for `_sum` metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
Setting the `send_distribution_counts_as_monotonic` parameter to `true` causes the `_count` and `_bucket` metrics to be sent as type `count` instead. Setting `send_distribution_sums_as_monotonic` does the same for `_sum` metrics.
```

> If the parameter `send_distribution_buckets` is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][107] and allow more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the relevant Datadog [blog post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][106].

Author: ```suggestion
If the parameter `send_distribution_buckets` is `true`, `_bucket` samples are aggregated into a Datadog `distribution`. [Datadog distribution metrics][108] are based on the [DDSketch algorithm][107] and allow more advanced statistical aggregations such as quantiles. For more information, see the Datadog Engineering Blog [post on OpenMetrics and distribution metrics][106].
```

### Summary

For [Prometheus/OpenMetrics `summary`][105], `_count` and `_sum` values are mapped to Datadog's `gauge` type by default, and include a `.count` and `.sum` suffix in their name, respectively. Quantile samples are mapped to a metric of type `gauge` with the `.quantile` suffix.

> Setting the parameter `send_distribution_counts_as_monotonic` to `true` will cause `_count` and metrics to be sent as type `count` instead. `send_distribution_sums_as_monotonic` will do the same for `_sum` metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
Setting the parameter `send_distribution_counts_as_monotonic` to `true` causes the `_count` and metrics to be sent as type `count` instead. Setting `send_distribution_sums_as_monotonic` does the same for `_sum` metrics.
```

[101]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#counter

> [102]: /metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic-count

Author: ```suggestion
[102]: /metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic_count
```

[103]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#gauge
[104]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram
[105]: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#summary
[106]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/whats-next-monitoring-kubernetes/#distribution-metrics
[107]: https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/computing-accurate-percentiles-with-ddsketch/
[108]: /metrics/distributions/

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> <div class="alert alert-info">All <code>count</code> metrics are processed by the Agent as <em>monotonic counts</em>, meaning the Agent actually sends the difference between consecutive raw values. [Read more about monotonic counters][102].</div>

Author: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">All <code>count</code> metrics are processed by the Agent as <em>monotonic counts</em>, meaning the Agent actually sends the difference between consecutive raw values. For more information, see <a href="/metrics/custom_metrics/agent_metrics_submission/?tab=count#monotonic_count">Metric Submission: Custom Agent Check</a>.</div>
```

- link: "/integrations/mysql/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about the MySQL integration"
- link: "/agent/kubernetes/prometheus/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Kubernetes Prometheus and OpenMetrics metrics collection"
---

## Overview

This page walks you through how Prometheus or OpenMetrics check metrics map to existing Datadog metric types.

## Prometheus and OpenMetrics metric types

For more information, see [Kubernetes Prometheus and OpenMetrics Metrics Collection][1].

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Latest Version" %}}
* `gauge`: A metric that represents a single numeric value, which can arbitrarily go up and down.
* `counter`: A cumulative metric that represents a single monotonically increasing counter, whose value can only increase—or be reset to zero.
* `stateset`: A metric that represents a series of related boolean values, also known as a bitset. 
* `info`: A metric that exposes textual information which should not change during the process lifetime. For example, an application's version, revision control commit, and the compiler version.
* `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.

> * `gaugehistogram`: Samples current distributions and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.

Reviewer 2: We don't support `stateset`, `info` and `gaugehistogram` currently (and will probably do so when there's demand for it), so I think we should leave those out. Note that https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/ doesn't mention them either.

Author: ```suggestion
* `histogram`: Samples observations and counts them in configurable buckets; also provides a sum of all observed values.
```
